# Principle 5. Learn How to Make Decisions Effectively

## First Order and Second Order Consequences
First order or first consquences are the temptations that we really want or sometimes these are the barriers that stand in our way.

For example exercising, first order outcomes of exercising:
- Pain.
- Muscle soreness.
- Longer recovery time.
- Feeling body pain throughout the day.
- Less energy to do other things.

But once that exercising is done repeatedly for a month or two. The below are the second order consequnces of the same exercise:
- Muscle flexibility.
- High energy throughout the day.
- Feeling happy and good mental health.
- Ability to perform other tasks with agility and speed.
- More confidence.

_This is quite opposite to the first order outcomes._
But people overweigh the first order consquences too much and forget the second order consquences. 
Second order order consequences provide a contradicting and opposite result to first order consequences.

In general for many people, first order short sighted outcomes are the ones that causes major setbacks. Whereas delayed gratification, comes from thinking and measuring things in the long term.

A lot of extraordinary things in life are due to first order negative and second order positive outcomes. And it also requires a lot of mental training to get used to this thinking process and acting upon it. 

Ask yourself, after every stage of decision making, "And then what?".

First level thinking looks similar. Everyone can do the same, and reach the same conclusion. Road to out think people comes from second order thinking. 

## On improving your ability to think
1. Ask yourself, "And then what?"
2. Think through time -- what do the consequences look like in 10 minutes, 10 hours, 10 days, 10 weeks, 10 months and 10 years?

Nature filters out on the first/second order consequences of things. Giving totally different outcomes to the same task for a long time. And even worst circumstances can be made better with the right approach. 


## Interal Locus of Control
"While we are free to chose our actions, we are not free to chose the consequences of our actions."
~ Stephen Covey, 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. 

Whatever circumstances life brings you. you will be more likely to succeed and find happiness if you take responsibility for making your decisions well instead of complaining about things beyond your control. 

We hate to be wrong, because it means that we need to reasses ourselves, re do our comfortable lives and sometimes it takes an enormous amount of unlearning and re-learning. 

**Questions about second order effects.**
1. What are the most probable consequences of a system change you are considering?
2. What are the consequences of those consequences?
3. What can you do to minimize the probablity and cost of unintended consequences?

## 10 Commandments of Super Forecasting:
1. Focus your time and effort on forecasts that will prove rewarding. 
2. Unpack problems to expose assumptions, catch mistakes, and correct biases.
3. Consider the larger category before looking at the particular case.
4. Revise your beliefs often and in small increments to reduce the risk of both over and under reacting to the news. 
5. Find merit in opposite viewpoints. 
6. Reject the illusions of certainity and learn to think in degrees of uncertainity. 
7. Avoid being either a blowhard or a waffler. Aim to be purely decisive. 
8. Learn from experience, whether success or failure. 
9. Use precision questioning to bring out the best in others and to let others bring out the best in you. 
10. Try, fail, analyze, and adjust. And try again. 
11. There are no universally correct commandments including these. Question everything.

